---
layout: post
title: Machine Learning and the Humanities
subtitle: The mashup of the 21st century
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumb.png
share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [video games, humanities, simulation, fifth]
---

I have been a fan of video games for as long as I can remember. I started playing games like Crash Bandicoot on the original Playstation and have played many more games on several different systems over the years. I always loved how video games made me feel while playing them by using sound and visuals to immerse me into a well-produced story, while using creative gameplay mechanics to make me feel a sense of accomplishment when beating a hard boss or seeing the final cutscene. I spend a fair chunk of my free time playing video games, and I have recently started to wonder – do video games have a place in the humanities?

I started to ask this question because I believe that if we could analyze and write about books and movies, why not video games too? As humanists, we are concerned with the study of humanity and our record. Discoveries concerning this record are “communicated (books and articles), the process by which this knowledge was achieved often takes the form of re-creation of the author’s or author’s experience.” (Coltrain & Ramsay, 2019) Video games are a part of this record, and I would argue that they present a new medium for humanists to study, that which has a place in the textual, visual, audible, interactive, and sensory mediums. Video games have so much analytical potential and so much work that goes into making an experience for a player, whether it be a team-based game or a platforming game with an intense story, all choices leading up to the final product are intentional and worth analyzing. 

Video games having potential as something to analyze is no question, it is questionable whether something like a video game is scholarly or not. Because of the association games like DOOM have with gore and violence, this can lead to fun experiences for sure, but it can also miss the opportunity to be taken seriously as a scholarly piece. An easy way around this is to “provide players of these games with the theoretical tools with which to think critically about them. Even if most games are violent and sexist, and hence not worthy of attention as ‘great’ works of fiction, well-articulated theories can give critics a way of discussing these issues.” (Rockwell, 2002) The argument of having well-articulated theories is a perfect example of how to have a critical conversation about a video game. I can see this being present when attempting to learn about how theories function in real life, perhaps through a simulation game like the Sims, though this depends heavily on “developed features for capturing the scholarly experience, particularly as it relates to articulations of new arguments and interpretations.” (Coltrain & Ramsay, 2019)

Another super useful part of video games that I have yet to discuss is the ability for games to simulate human experience. Games like Animal Crossing place the player in charge of their town and simulate what it would be like to live in this fictional world filled with animals. Role playing games have unparalleled potential when it comes to “modeling humanistic theories in a way that more closely resembles the diverse variety of subjective human experiences.” (Coltrain & Ramsay, 2019) Sim games are extremely powerful at modeling experience that the designers of the game want you to have, whether you’re playing as a fictional character or one modeled after a character from real life. Playing a character that has been modeled to give the viewer a glimpse into what life as that character is like is extremely powerful, and the game Dishonored comes to mind, as every action you make in your journey has consequences, and you can choose how you want to experience the game because of this. Actions these characters perform are also important, as games have to simplify situations that they facilitate, but then the argument can be made that good humanities scholarship does the same thing (Coltrain & Ramsay, 2019).

I have read that the potential for video games to have a presence in the humanities is there and ready to happen, it just needs to happen and be made. I agree with this, and that leads me to wonder what the first scholarly video game will look like. Surely it will be an intriguing game, but the options for what it could be about or explore are virtually endless. Just as film and video were once emerging areas of scholarly work, video games seem to be next on the horizon to further the field of humanities. 




Sources used:

Coltrain, James, and Stephen Ramsay. “Can Video Games Be Humanities Scholarship?” Debates in the Digital Humanities 2019, edited by Matthew K. Gold and Lauren F. Klein, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis; London, 2019, pp. 36–45. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/10.5749/j.ctvg251hk.6. Accessed 28 Nov. 2020.

Rockwell, Geoffrey. “Gore Galore: Literary Theory and Computer Games.” Computers and the Humanities, vol. 36, no. 3, 2002, pp. 345–358. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/30200532. Accessed 28 Nov. 2020.
