---
layout: post
title: Machine Learning and the Humanities
subtitle: The mashup of the 21st century
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/machine learning.jpg
share-img: /assets/img/archive.jpg
tags: [ai, humanities, machine learning, fourth]
---

One of my favorite podcasts to listen to is a show by CGP Grey and Brady Haran called Hello Internet, and a topic that was brought up a couple times is the idea of our smart devices acting as an extension of our minds, and what benefits and drawbacks come with that. I know that I certainly agree with this concept, as I store a lot of the things I can’t seem to remember in tools like my notes app and a task manager, and am able to sort different things into folders so I know where to find exactly what I am looking for in the future. Other people make use of things like calendars and planners to keep important events and due dates in their heads, but this idea of devices as extensions of the mind can also be applied to the need of humanities in the age of machine learning. In this situation, I’m thinking of the way we keep and maintain data as us putting all of our thoughts into a collective notes app, or an archive, and then having machine learning sort and categorize this information. 

I wanted to talk more about the importance of cooperation between machine learning and the humanities, as we briefly talked about it in our class previously this semester. Initially, I thought that this was an interesting subject to think about, because it seemed like there was a logical need for the humanities to take advantage of new technologies in order to progress further, like with fields in digital humanities and archival work. Both these fields can mutually benefit from helping each other, like how machine learning is advanced when it is fed information and learns from it, and the humanities benefit when we see results from machine learning and are able to find trends in texts, or whatever we may be looking for more easily. It is exciting to be in the middle of developing these two things together, as it could lead to a world of possibilities when it comes to data analyzation and even discovering new trends in old data. 

I mentioned earlier about benefits and doubts of having machine learning work alongside the humanities, and I wanted to talk about each a little more in depth. Starting with the benefits, machine learning can be put to work in libraries to sort and categorize texts and make them easily findable. And to my understanding, there is a way that these texts can also be transcribed, or have the original text be made searchable like you can do in Adobe Acrobat. Having searchable text is game changing when it comes to research, because then someone looking for information or trends can come along and access the library, find what they’re looking for, and then use something like Voyant and Antconc to further analyze for trends and compare corpora. It is important to note though, that “projects that conduct analysis at scale are dependent on ready access to machine-actionable collections” (Padilla, 2019), and this work can only be done if the work to make these archives accessible by doing things like making them searchable as I talked about earlier.   

Now a little about the downsides to using AI and the humanities together, and most of this stems from an understandable distrust of big tech that gets involved in this kind of work by skewing results in their favor or manipulating search results that will have you stay on their site as long as possible. Applying new questions to old data is central to why machine learning is good for the humanities, but “as our knowledge about the present is increasingly filtered through statistical models aimed at specific target markets, we may need comparative strategies to understand our own lives.” (Underwood, 2020) Historians are notorious when it comes to being cautious and skeptical when a new method of research that makes work easier comes about. Their “traditions of caution and relativism are not alien to the sparkling new world of computers.” (Underwood, 2020) This is true, and I think they are right to have initial doubts until the systems are robust enough to have a shared confidence in use across the humanities. 

That being said though and having personally been in a classroom that experimented with this sort of technology, I believe that now is the time to experiment with machine learning and see what it can do for the humanities. Experimenting at the very least will get us familiar with the technology and having these extra skills can shape research in unique ways that could drastically alter the outcome of projects for the better. 

Sources used: 

Padilla, Thomas. 2019. Responsible Operations: Data Science, Machine Learning, and AI in Libraries. Dublin, OH: OCLC Research. https://doi.org/10.25333/xk7z-9g97. 

Underwood, Ted. “Why an Age of Machine Learning Needs the Humanities.” Public Books, 23 June 2020, www.publicbooks.org/why-an-age-of-machine-learning-needs-the-humanities/. 


