---
layout: post
title: What does nothing look like?
subtitle: It's not that simple. 
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/absence.jpg
share-img: /assets/img/nothing.jpg
tags: [image, space, absence, third]
---

I’ve spent a great deal of time over the past several weeks trying to think of what nothing looks like. This may seem like something crazy to think about, because of course nothing is the absence of something, or empty space. But what does that absence tell us, and how are we made aware of when this emptiness is present? I would argue that the presence of nothing is in itself its own image, and we recognize this whenever we are looking at data. Today I want to talk about the image of absence. 

I got the idea for this subject by coming across a penumbral reading for this Introduction to Digital Humanities class, titled “The Image of Absence” by Lauren Klein. Before I actually read this article though, I spent a bit of time trying to figure out what exactly this means. At first, I was thinking oh, the image of absence is just nothing itself. But as I thought about it more, I started to ask questions. How do we know nothing is there? Is nothing there because we know something is missing? Is nothing there because there is a lack of information, and if so, how do we know something is missing? What about absence when it is applied to data visualization? Or experiments, could absence be thought of as a control group? This ended up creating a number of questions I don’t quite know what to do with, but something I eventually thought of was this: absence is its own image, one of nothing, an in-between, if you will. 

Lauren Klein does a fantastic job of giving an example of this image of absence by telling a brief story about a relationship between Thomas Jefferson and his personal chef, James Hemmings. Hemmings traveled with Jefferson on many occasions, and before he was freed, he was required to train his successor. After obtaining his freedom, Jefferson referred to him as nothing more than a “former servant”. I believe that Klein says it best when she says that “this striking instantiation of archival silence illuminates the concerns that course through the archive of the antebellum United States.” (2013) How are we to know what roles slaves really had if documents in slavery’s archive are mostly published by mostly white men, when we have to work to make these documents mean something? This damage is concerning, especially when knowing much information about slaves is only known through ledgers, sales, and letters.

When creating a text, an author is conscious of what to include, and also what not to include. In the case of slavery and its recorded history, there is an intentional lack of information in order to erase histories. But as I said earlier, absence is its own image. By choosing to erase these histories, there has been a significant effort to uncover as much as possible in order to restore what is missing. This is of course an impossibly large project to take on, but it’s better than leaving pasts unknown. 

Uncovering these pasts also makes me think of those movies like National Treasure where the protagonist is reading between the lines in order to uncover some ancient artifact, and this methodology can also be applied to uncover information that was previously lost. What I mean by this is coming across something striking when data cleaning, such as a term for an individual with an occupation and wondering what their name was. This is how James Hemmings was discovered and added into the metadata of a letter. This reading between the lines made me think of something we were talking about earlier in the semester when we were discussing data visualization, specifically about how space produces meaning. Isabel Meirelles says that “visualizations provide spatial models and concrete ways for understanding concepts” (2018), but even while this is focused on data visualization, I want to argue that it still applies here, and that absence is its own image. The use of the term “space” in this article had me thinking about negative space, or more in line with this post, negative space of archives. This lack of substance has its own meaning of silence and oppression when it comes to representing information about slavery in the United States. 

As we continue to usher in this digital age of information overload, it is still important to remember that it was not always like this, and we are still trying to uncover information about slaves. While it is good to uncover as much as we can with what we have, reading between the lines can lead to further discoveries to learn more about the past and bring new life to the past, just like it did with James Hemmings. 



Sources used:

Klein, Lauren F. “The Image of Absence: Archival Silence, Data Visualization, and James Hemings.” American Literature, vol. 85, no. 4, 1 Dec. 2013. pp. 661-668. Duke University Press, https://doi-org.ezproxy.neu.edu/10.1215/00029831-2367310

Meirelles, Isabel. “Visualizing information.” The Shape of Data in Digital Humanities, edited by Julia Flanders and Fotis Jannidis, Taylor & Francis Group, 2018, 167-177.
